Introduction
------------

Western Hemlocks (Tsuga heterophylla, TSHE) in old-growth forest at Seward Park appear to be
diseased and dying at higher than historical and background rates.  WSU plant pathologist Marianne
Elliott, UW ecologist Tim Billo, and forest steward Paul Shannon toured the forest on April 9th
2021, formulating the hemlock survey here proposed. 

The decline of Seward Park hemlocks is not an isolated event.  Western Redcedar declineis the focus
of WSU Joseph Hulbert's Forest Watch project.  Broad regional effects are described in Stanke et al,
"Over half of western United States' most abundant tree species in decline", Nature Communications
2021, in which USFS Forest Inventory and Analysis data are complemented by FSI, the author's
proposed Forest Stability Index.  The proposed Seward Hemlock survey is inspired by, will adopt
methods from both, and offer reports to both of these ongoing efforts.

Environmental decline is not our only concern.  The last year has focused our minds, and the minds
of many, on the historical roots and persistence of racism and systematic inequity in the United
States.  This problem takes many forms, including high incarceration rates and social immobility -
the "new Jim Crow".  It is manifest in the low number of young people of color in science and
engineering educational programs and professions.

As a minor but not inconsequential effort to contribute on both of these fronts, The Friends of
Seward Park (FoSP) has joined with CHOOSE 180 - a King County jail diversion program for at-risk
youth.  We secured a $4500 Department of Neighborhoods grant, 90% of which will be used to hire
youths from CHOOSE 180's jail diversion program.  We will train them in methods of forest monitoring
and data analysis.  We will introduce them to PNW forest natural history.  Four to six young adults
will be supervised by FoSP board member, and Green Seattle Partnership forest steward Paul Shannon,
advised by plant pathologist Elliott and ecologist Billo, spending four to six weeks
surveying in Seward's forest.

Site Selection
--------------

The USFS Forest Inventory and Analsysis Program, and some Seattle Parks forest inventory projects
typically use small randomly placed circular plots for their surveys.  The FIA protocol combines 4
subplots within a larger circle, totaling 1/6 of an acre, sometimes also containing microplots.  GSP
plots at Seward employ circles with a 10m radius.  Some Earth Corps projects at Seward have used
transects.

Our site selection is driven by three goals, leading us to choose a single large (4.6 acre),
trail-bounded, heart-shaped region at the center of the forest.  The three goals, adumbrated above,
are to:

  1) Establish a hemlock demographic baseline in a hemlock-rich area with both healthy and diseased trees.
  2) Obtain affected plant tissue for analysis by Marianne Elliot from short, easily-reached hemlock boughs.
  3) Offer a mostly intact, hetergeneous and ecologically rich forest area, of limited size, in
     which students can learn many aspects of the natural history of an old-growth PNW lowland forest.

The selected site meets all three criteria.  It is 4.6 acres (1.8 hectare), mostly flat, bounded
neatly by the sqebeqsed and Windfall trails.  This centrally located forest region is somewhat
isolated from forces associated with edge effects and user impact, reducing a multitude of
confounding variables that might affect the dynamics of Seward's forest.  It should give us a
reliable, if conservative, estimate of the extent of disease in Seward Park's hemlocks.  The
peninsula-wide sword fern die-off has thus far had a low impact in this area (2% mortality as of
January 2019).  Douglass squirrels, evergreen huckleberry, and large fallen doug firs identify it as
a good representative of the early old growth lowland forest.

Methods
-------

Our Seward Hemlock survey will be shaped by the nature of our work force.  Young adults from CHOOSE
180 will likely be scientifically naive at the start of the project.  We have, however, the luxury of
ample time: the DoN grant provides funding for at least 4 weeks, 16 hours per week for 2-5 youths.

Consequently, we will use a slow, staged methodology, with careful instruction at each stage, including

     a) Species identification
     b) Temporary tree flagging
     c) DBH and height measurement of approximately 80 trees, all sizes, dead and alive (FIA protocol)
     d) Health assessment via needle distribution (crown, middle, base) adapting (per Marianne
        Elliott) the Dwarf Mistletoe Rating system (DMR), substituting defoliation for mistletoe
        infection.  See https://forestpathology.org/parasitic-plants/dwarf-mistletoe/ecology/
     e) Close observations of affected needles and twigs by measurments, counts, text description
        and photography, identifying affected samples for Marianne Elliott which she will use for
	for subsequent needle and twig collection and laboratory analysis.  Insight into the nature
        of the decline may result.

Deliverables
------------

At the conclusion of the study, we will produce and archive per-acre and per-hectare (TPA and TPH)
statistics following the data schema of the US Forest Service Forest Inventory and Analysis Project.

These data will thereby set up and enable future repeat surveys of the plot, as well as other
possible surveys at Seward, using the forest stability index (FSI) proposed by Stanke et al, to
track change over time, or some similar metric.

In addition, we hope to submit a research note to Douglasia, the journal of the Washington Native Plant
Society.  Such a submission would be a fitting capstone to the CHOOSE 180 youths' summer.



References
----------




DoN funding will pay a minimum wage to 2-5 youth selected by CHOOSE 180, for 4-6 weeks, 4 hours a
day, four days a week, and for the purchase of a GPS device and a clinometer.  We propose a formal,
staged inspection and inventory of hemlocks in the site, compatible with the methods and data
standards of the US Forest Service Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program, to achieve these five
goals:

  1) Establish the current count, size and health status of Tsuga heterophylla in this
     large, central and representative plot.

  2) Introduce two to five at-risk Choose 180 youth into the methods of field biology and data
     analysis.

  3) Provide affected plant tissue to WSU plant pathologist Dr. Marianne Elliott for analysis.

  4) Contribute our observations to the WSU-afffilated Forest Health Watch project

  5) Contribute to the long-term ecological monitoring of Seward Park's rare old-growth forest.

The context for, and the urgency of this project is captured in a recent study published in the
journal Nature: "Over half of western United States' most abundant tree species in decline" (Stanke
et al, Nature Communications, January 2021).  PNW tree species are in apparent decline as well
(Bigleaf Maple, Western Redcedar, and - of immediate concern at Seward - the Western Hemlock). We
will emulate the FIA and Stankeprojects, measuring the same standard FIA attributes, though adapting
the FIA plot selection protocol to Seward's forest and the educational needs of the CHOOSE 180
youth.

Methods

We propose to collect data consistent with FAI surveys, which to date include 24,000 repeated
censuses over several decades.  See https://www.fia.fs.fed.us.

FAI plot surveys are executed quickly by professional foresters, on 1/6 acre sample plots and
subplots, measuring all trees of target species > 1" DBH. We shall collect the same per-tree data on
hemlocks in a single large, central, representative plot.  This contiguous single area is 4.6 acres
(1.8 hectare) and thus differs from FIA's standard, randomized 1/6 acre, four subplot scheme.  FIA's
plots are motivated by scarce labor and a continental scale, factors not applicable at
Seward. Nonetheless, standard FIA "TPA" or "TPH" summaries (trees per acre or hectare) will be
provided at the conclusion of our study.

Our Seward TSHE survey is not constrained by the FAI need for efficiency at scale, but is instead
shaped by the nature of our work force.  These youths will be initially scientifically naive.
However, and incontrast to FIA, we have the luxury of ample time: the DoN grant provides funding for
at least 4 weeks, 16 hours per week for 2-5 youths.  This permits two modifications of the FAI
protocol, in plot selection, and in methodology:

  1) We will survey a 4.5 acre (1.8 hectare) region of Seward's Forest, contained by the Windfall
     and sqebeqd trails, in which approximately 80 TSHE are found, of all sizes and health status.

  2) We will use a slow, staged methodology, with careful instruction at each stage, including
     a) Species identification
     b) Temporary tree flagging
     c) DBH and height measurement of approximately 80 trees, all sizes, dead and alive
     d) Health assessment via needle distribution (crown, middle, base) adapting (per Marianne
        Elliott) the Dwarf Mistletoe Rating system (DMR), substituting defoliation for mistletoe
        infection.  See https://forestpathology.org/parasitic-plants/dwarf-mistletoe/ecology/
     e) Reporting affected trees to Marianne Elliott for subsequent needle and twig collection,
        and laboratory analysis

Deliverables

At the conclusion of the study, we will produce and archive  per-acre and per-hectare (TPA and
TPH) statistics consistent with the data schema of the US Forest Service Forest Inventory and
Analysis Plots.  

These data set up and enable future repeat surveys of the plot, as well as other possible surveys at Seward,
using the forest stability index (FSI) proposed by Stanke et al, to track change over time, or some
similar metric.

In addition, we hope to submit a research note to Douglasia, the journal of the Washington Native Plant
Society.

Affected hemlock needle and tissue samples will be provided to Marianne Elliott for analysis in the WSU
Puyallup Plant Pathology laboratory, possibly leading to greater understanding of the hemlock decline.






FoSP has allied with CHOOSE 180, a community-centered effort in partnership with the King County
Prosecuting Attorney's Office to reduce race-based and economic disproportionality in incarceration,
to keep youth out of the juvenile justice system, and to break the school-to-prison pipeline.

Together FoSP and CHOOSE 180, were awarded a $4500 Department of Neighborhoods (DoN) Small Sparks
Fund grant to employ a small group of at-risk youth to survey hemlock status in a large sample plot
at Seward Park during the summer of 2021, supervised pro bono by Shannon, under the scientific
guidance of Elliott, Billo, with the advice and consent of Seattle Parks plant ecologists.


