--- 19 jul 2020
leo and I started clearing in 2018
I finished clearing in early 2019
right side was "fully grubbed"
left side was incompletely grubbed
irene completed planting all but 20 plants (23 feb 2020) left rest to me

-- 24 may 2020: plant order: 35 plants

  Alnus rubra, Red alder 2
  Carex obnupta, Slough sedge 6
  Rosa nutkana, Nootka rose 4
  Salix lucida, Pacific willow 3
  Scirpus microcarpus, Panicled 6 bulrush
  Spirea douglasii, Hardhack 5
  Symphoricarpos albus, 10 Snowberry

--- 22 apr 2020: final report to GSP & Eric Sterner

This report concludes (almost) the most active phases of LE7-edge blackberry removal experiment
begun in the summer of 2018.  Several work logs have been submitted previously: by me,over the two
years that this intermittent project has run, and by Irene Munger, for her indispensable planting
and mulching work this spring.

In the original plan/request, https://seattle.greencitypartnerships.org/event/16695/ I suggested :

1)lay in mulch as thick and deep as you will permit, heaviest in the downslope quadrants (the
upslope have at least 50% native cover)

2) plant into that thick mulch after it decays a bit

3) whenever resprouting occurs, I trim sprouts back to the ground, for a few years - not much labor
will be needed.

4) I water the new plants for 2 or 3 summers, taking water from the lake

5) after three years we should know if repeated clipping exhausts the roots in the east downslope
quadrant

6) I hope that all the grubbing in the west downslope quadrant killed most of the HBB that
used to be there - we will see!

7) we will also find out (I’m a little dubious) if we can get plants to survive in the rocky
downslope area To boil this down to one request: I’d be delighted to see LOTS of mulch delivered to
the site for me to spread thick in the downslope quadrants well before planting in December.

The preparatory mulching plan did not work out, so we did post-planting mulching instead.  The
record seems to say that I requested 5 cubic yards of mulch - a lot!- and my recollection is that a
more conservative 2 yards were delivered.

I hope that some additional mulch may now be deemed appropriate.

What lies ahead:

1) watering the plants through the summer drought, using 5-gallon buckets and lake water.

2) site maintenance: identify and trim/destroy any returning HBB in the 400 sq ft restoration area

3) track long-term success or failure of the project.  Do the new plants succeed?  How much effort
is needed to keep the HBB at bay?
