The old-growth forest at Seward Park is in trouble.  Two crucial
species - Western Hemlock and Sword Fern - are in rapid decline, dying
in large numbers.  Their loss leaves large holes in the forest's
ecosystems.   Further weakening and species loss will follow.

In 1850, when Seward's forest was already three hundred years old, and
before colonization and logging, Seward's 100 acres were but a tiny
part of 1 million acres of Puget Lowland fir/hemlock/cedar forest.
Now only 1000 acres of old-growth survive, and Seward Park's
"Magnificent Forest" 100 acres is a rare survival.

Plant mortality is expected in a mature forest.  But widespread and
accelerating loss of keystone species is not.  Sword ferns are
famously robust, and resistant to drought.  Each individual plant,
once established, lives for centuries. "1000 years is not out of the
question" we have been told by the Polystichum genus expert, botanist
David Barrington of the Univeristy of Vermont.  The widespread die-off
of sword ferns at Seward Park is not business as usual, and is now
observed at many other sites throughout the Puget Lowland.

The Western Hemlock appears only a mature PNW forest.  Shade tolerant
and long-lived, it is a climax species, succeeding itself, forming
both understory and overstory, along with cedar, maple and Douglas
Fir.  It is subject to a variety of fungal diseases, and occasional
hotspots of infection are often found in an old-growth forest.
Supported by a $4500 Department of Neighborhoods grant, we paid wages
to three high school interns from an at-risk demographic this summer
to assess the extent of the hemlock decline.  We learned that it is
moving north to south, and has already affected more than 90% of the
trees in the oldest, richest, most hemlock dense northern third of the
forest.   Complete loss of hemlocks is predicted (Dr. Bob Edmunds,
personal communication) followed by the loss of all conifers at Seward. 

Faced with this grim situation, the Friends of Seward Park and our
scientific allies - primarily Marianne Elliott from WSU and Tim Billo
from UW - have worked since 2014, without pay, to collect data, map
the decline, and done experimental planting to discover the cause of
the sword fern die-off.  An $8k community grant paid for a greenhouse
experiment confirming that a pathogen is likely the primary cause of
sword fern death, and a pilot DNA sequencing project (which was
inconclusive).

Dr. Edmonds suggests a perfect storm of fungal pathogens may explain
hemlock decline, likely compounded by recent years of low precipitation and
high temperatures.

After initially resisting evidence of the sword fern die-off, Seattle
Parks made some small contributions to sword fern research at Seward,
spending about $30k in two consultant-led projects.  Unfortunately,
both were designed to confirm Parks' firmly held, but easily disproved
conviction that drought and climate change were the primary cause.
Only in spring of this year has this conviction loosened, and now we
learn that the sword fern problem is "too big for Parks to address".
No studies of the hemlock decline were made until the Friends of
Seward Park and CHOOSE180 interns spent six weeks on the problem this
summer.

Seattle Parks has done very valuable work in restoration planting in
some of the barren areas left where the sword ferns died, and by
providing cisterns and hoses for our volunteer planting.  Contractors
have been hired, thousands of native plants installed, and this year,
watered through their first summer.  Seattle Parks is well-suited to
such intensive, short-term work.  And, as mentioned above, in letting
contracts for short-term attempts to support their favored drought
hypothesis.

We have learned that Seattle Parks is unable to - or does not choose
to - support forest science as it is often practiced: through
competitive grants, across multiple years, culminating in
peer-reviewed publications.   Yet this is exactly what the decline of
Seward's old-growth forest requires.

There is no guarantee that such research will stop, much less reverse
the decline.   But it may.  And continued neglect, offset only by
minimally funded volunteer efforts, is insufficient to this task.
The time has come to fund and carry out this research, for these reasons:


1) This rare remnant forest, in all its complex beauty, is visited and
valued by many people from the diverse, surrounding South Seattle
community, and around the broader region.  Its decline and subsequent
loss, in which it is reduced to a simpler, mostly deciduous forest,
would be mourned by many.

2) The forest provides an ideal early warning study site for PNW
forests.  The sword fern die-off, if systematically and rigorously
addressed in 2015, would have established the mechanisms behind the
phenomenon, and if remedies were found, the ongoing and accelerating
die-off in the Issaquah Alps and the Kitsap Peninsula could have been
prevented.  Thus Seward's forest is complex and representative of
the region's forests, easily and observed, and subject to novel levels
of stress due to its location in the middle of metropolitan Seattle,
where temperatures tend to be higher and pollution is strongest.

We propose that university-based forest reseach is needed.  This is
typically accomplished by awarding a competitive grant sufficient to
fund a graduate student for 2-4 years who, working under the
supervision of an experienced investigator, designs and carries out
observations and experiments.  This typically costs $100k per year.

In order to attract this level of funding, I suggest that the Friends
of Seward Park create a short (1-minute) and a longer (perhaps 5
minute) video making the case for such funding.   I propose a budget
of up to $10k for this.




